We're going to dive straight in with our main story this week, which concerns law and order. It's not just the phrase that'll be uttered at least 400 times at Dick Wolf's funeral. It's also something that Trump's made a cornerstone of his appeal to voters. >> I campaigned on law and order. I was elected by a landslide on law and order. >> They stand for crime and chaos and corruption. We stand for law and order and justice. THERE WAS A time that you weren't allowed to use the words law and order. You weren't allowed to use the term law and order. You weren't allowed to use the term Christmas. Merry Christmas, everybody. Right? Remember that 2016 I ran on we're going to bring back Christmas. We did. Now they're afraid to suggest it, but we brought that back. But Law and Order, we need Law and Order. >> Oh yeah. How could we all forget that Trump saved Christmas? We all remember, right, that before 2016, the Hallmark Channel just ran movies called A Boyfriend for Winter, Finding Mistletoe for Strictly agricultural Reasons, and I fell in love with a chiseled Nordic looking man who's secretly a prince on a normal Wednesday. Thank goodness Trump intervened. But it's not just rhetoric. He's touted all sorts of tough on crime tactics from calling for the reopening of Alcatra to advocating for the death penalty for drug dealers to launching a war on fraud to stop Medicare and Medicaid from being looted by criminals and thugs to signing the Lake and Riley Act mandating all undocumented people be held in federal detention for crimes as minor as shoplifting. But I actually want to talk about the other side of the coin here where Trump's used the powers of the presidency to show mercy. Specifically, his use of pardons. You know the power presidents use to spare turkeys every Thanksgiving. Even if, as in this instance, the turkey really tries to push its luck. Hey buddy, buddy, your pardon ain't in there. The executive power to pardon someone for federal crimes is enshrined in the Constitution and it's virtually unchecked. And once a president decides to do it, there's basically nothing courts or Congress can do. And that is generally a good thing. As we've mentioned before in our piece on wrongful convictions, it's incredibly hard to appeal a conviction, especially in federal cases. And given there's no federal parole program, and that some people are serving egregiously long mandatory minimum sentences, oftentimes under laws that don't even exist anymore. In a deeply flawed criminal justice system, getting a pardon can be someone's only real chance at relief. But as you undoubtedly know, Trump's used pardons very selectively, as this scholar who studies them points out. One thing about clemency is that because it's an unchecked part of the president, it's going to reflect the values of that president. President Trump, we all knew before he was elected, things that are [music] important to him include loyalty and celebrity. And so it should not surprise us that clemency has been used for celebrities [music] and for those who have been loyal to him. >> Right. Trump has pardoned some famous  from George Santos to Rudy Giuliani to Sheriff Joe Araio. quite possibly the most difficult marry, kill I've ever seen. I I can't imagine anyone who picked Giuliani as the one to marry there, except for, of course, his cousin. And Trump's use of pardons has escalated sharply. While he granted 238 pardons of commutations in his first term, less than a year into his second, he'd already issued nearly 2,000. On top of that, he's rumored to be planning to announce another 250 soon to mark America's 250th birthday. So, given all of that, we thought tonight it'd be worth taking a look at Trump's pardons, who he's given them to, why, and what those choices mean, and let's start with where the power to pardon comes from. It's actually a relic of monarchical rule where kings had the final say on justice proceedings. And over the years, it's been used in all sorts of ways. Ratherford be Hayes once pardoned an Ohio man convicted of sending a scurless postcard and Abraham Lincoln once pardoned a man convicted of attempted bestiality. Apparently his reasoning was that the man had displayed exemplary behavior in prison. Plus he was drunk at the time. If nothing else, it is kind of fun to imagine Lincoln going, "Okay, hold on. Henry a goat. Quick question. How many beers deep was he? And can I see a picture of the goat? Let's be fair here. Now, over the years, some pardons have held up very well, like the mass commutation of drug sentences under Obama or the pardons for Vietnam draft evaders under Ford and Carter. But obviously, there have been some infamous examples, too. Joe Biden pardoned his son Hunter. Bill Clinton pardoned his friend and mega donor Mark Rich who'd been indicted on 65 criminal counts including tax fraud and trading with Iran while it held American hostages and who'd fled the country to avoid arrest. And then there was Gerald Ford's decision in his first month in office to pardon Richard Nixon which did not go down well at the time. The president got a face-toface look at the hostility today in Pittsburgh where he went to make a speech. >> [cheering] >> On the flight back to Washington, the president declined to talk to reporters about the pardon. His spokesman Hushen said the president knew the pardon would be controversial and was aware of the reaction. A White House switchboard operator told the president last night the volume of calls was very heavy and kind of unfavorable. Yeah, that's a pretty kind way for that operator to put it. The calls were heavy and unfavorable is a lot easier for a president to hear than Beverly from Cincinnati called you a corrupt taint and Paul from Kenosha said you're as crooked as a pig's dick. But obviously presidents pardoning their predecessors or family members are the exception. And to understand what Trump's done to the pardon system, it's worth knowing how it's usually worked. Very basically the system we've set up is that anyone can submit an application to the office of the pardon attorney. They then judge on a long list of criteria including the person's postconviction conduct, character and reputation, the seriousness and relative recentness of the offense, the acceptance of responsibility, remorse and atonement, the need for relief, and official recommendations and reports like for instance the FBI doing a background check to see if the person would be a threat to public safety if released. Now, if the pardon office signs off, the application then goes to the president. But crucially, that whole system is optional for a president. They don't need to listen to what the recommendations are or indeed run a pardon through that process at all. And Trump by and large hasn't. In his first term, he famously pardoned cronies and friends like Charles Kushner, Jared's dad, Paul Maniffort, and Roger Stone, who for some reason sells signed copies of his pardon on his website. It is the perfect gift for the special person in your life who you no longer want in your life. [cheering] Incredibly, it's only the second weirdest thing Roger Stone sells with the weirdest being this signed Make America Italian Again hat. First, I don't know what Make America Italian again even means. The only country on Earth that's ever been Italian is pretty famously Italy. But also, the listing specifies that the hat comes handsighted by Roger Stone by default. And please leave a note with your order if you would like it unsigned. And just imagine the person that's aimed at. Someone who likes Roger Stone enough to be browsing the merch on stones.com and decides to spend $30 on a Make America Italian AA again HAT BUT DOESN'T WANT ROGER Stone signature on it cuz that would make it weird. Now, to be fair, Trump's first term also saw some very worthy pardons, including Alice Johnson, who'd been given a life sentence for drug trafficking charges from the '9s. And while the reason he did that probably had more to do with the fact that she'd be advocated for by Kim Kardashian, it is still undeniably good that he did it. But in Trump's second term, he's used his pardon power to a truly ridiculous degree. To start, on day one, he did this. So this is January 6th and these are the hostages approximately 1,500 for a pardon. >> Yes. >> Full pardon. >> The full complete and unconditional pardons include the former leader of the farright group the Proud Boys, Enrique Tario, sentenced to 22 years for sedition. Trump also commuting the sentences of 14 others charged with sedition including Stuart Rhodess, founder of the Oathkeepers militia, sentenced to 18 years. Trump even granting clemency to the more than 600 people charged with assaulting or resisting law enforcement. [cheering] Riers on January 6th attacking police using everything from shields to flag holes, even cattle prods. >> Yeah, not great. Because if you show up to A PROTEST WITH A CATTLE PROD, your motives are automatically questionable. Honestly, that's true. If you show up anywhere with one, NEXT TIME YOUR FRIENDS INVITE you to dinner, try showing up with a bottle of wine and a cattle prod and see how long it is before they say they're not feeling well and will have to invite you over another time. The very next day, Trump pardoned Ross Albert, founder of the Silk Roads dark web marketplace, who was serving a life sentence for his site becoming what the DOJ described as the most sophisticated and extensive criminal marketplace on the internet today, which is saying a lot considering I recently discovered a website charging people real human dollars for an autographed Make America Italian Again hat. If that's not a crime, I don't think I know what one is. So clearly, that was a lot of wild decisions right off the bat. In fact, legal experts say no president has started a term with so many pardons that violate long-standing policies and norms. And those norms were there for a reason. Take those January sixes. Even if you think many pos, there is a reason that it might have been good to do things like running background checks before allowing all of them to return home with zero supervision. Because not only were many facing other charges at the time, in the year and a half since, at least 12 have been charged with other serious crimes, including assault, harassment, and murder plots. And when it comes to remorse, just listen to one of the more prominent January successes, Jake Lang, at a rally to celebrate the one one-year anniversary of their pardons. >> You were accused of doing some violent stuff. >> Well, I was accused of defending my country versus the violent >> beating capital police officers with a pole. These people were red coats, traitors to the Constitution. They turned their weapons against >> unarmed police officers. >> Listen, it doesn't matter if your uniform. >> Okay. Okay. You probably already know that he is full of But let's address the most striking part of that, his outfit. Because what [cheering] is happening there? I didn't realize you could get scarves in the wrong size. Everything from his neck up is giving frat boy on spring break, but everything from the neck down is giving poetry professor at Hogwarts. He looks like what would happen if Steve Carell Grrew, which must must be something that Steve's thought about, right? Doesn't every voice actor wonder what it'd be like to have sex with the cartoon character that they voice? I know I have. I've thought about what it would be like to Vanity Smurf and what it would be like to Zazu. It's not because I find it aris arousing. I don't. But you can't tell me that you wouldn't be curious what it'd be like to  someone and hear your own voice coming out of their mouth. It would be so strange. And if you think about why would you find a cartoon character sexually attractive in the first place? First, lots of people do, but that's not what this thought exercise is asking. Really, for the record, I don't find either of these characters attractive. But let's suppose there was a universe where I did and they found me attractive. Could I go through with it if they sounded exactly like me? Because it's not like I'd be myself, is it? I'd be someone else that just has my voice. How would that feel? How would I react if midquitus I heard my own pleasure moments coming out of Zazu's beak? Would it ruin the whole thing? Would I somehow enjoy it? And if so, does that make me a narcissist? Also, would it be weird for them? Because to Vanity, Smurf and Zazu, I have their voices, don't I? So, so could they do it? Of course, they're cartoon characters. This could just be me projecting my own humanity onto a smurf and a talking bird when they exist on their own plains of morality and biological impulse that don't necessarily conform to what we'd say is right or wrong. You know, after a lot of thought and consideration, ultimately I think I would be able to power through and have sex with Vanity Smurf and Zazu, but I'd feel really guilty about it afterwards, and I'm not totally sure why. Anyway, I would love to talk about this more, but we don't have time. So, I'll just conclude by saying this. Let's see Byron Allen do that on Comics Unleashed. Anyway, the point here is Trump rushed out a ton of pardons for January 6th writers. And since then, he's even tried to set up a nearly $1.8 $8 billion fund to compensate anyone who feels they were unfairly prosecuted under Biden, which it seems many January 6ers hope to take advantage of given that guy you just saw apparently answered his phone the day that fund was announced with Jake Lang's office, America's newest billionaire. But the truth is, rumors of the fund had been circulating long before it was officially announced to the point that one January 6th literally tried to use it to cover up his tracks on a different truly horrendous crime. Meet Andrew Paul Johnson, charged with storming the capital, pardoned by the president. There you see him circled in the crowd. He was arrested just 6 months later for multiple child sexual abuse charges in Florida. And apparently he tried to buy the silence of one of his child victims by claiming he stood to receive $10 million as restitution for being a January 6er. Holy I don't know if there is any clearer example of two wrongs don't make a right than trying to silence your child victim with your treason money. And look, if Trump's pardons were only about releasing January 6es and funing money to them, that would be bad enough. But it goes well beyond that. More than 50 of the pardons and commutations he's made in his second term are for fraud. And white collar offenses such as moneyaundering, bank fraud, and wire fraud are among the most frequent crimes he's wiped clean. It's ranged from your Ponzi schemers to campaign finance violators to this man, Trevor Milton. He was the founder of an electric trucking company called Nicola, which he apparently wanted to name after Nicola Tesla, but as Tesla was already taken, he went with Nicola instead. the name only marginally more creative than Tesla 2. Tesla with two A's and Tesla again, but different. Anyway, Nicola's electric truck looked pretty impressive. Here is a video that was posted to the company's social media captioned, "Behold the 1000HP zero emission Nicola semi-truck in motion." The only problem was, as the company later admitted, the reason that truck wasn't emitting anything is that it had been towed to the top of a hill and allowed to roll down, making it the perfect truck for anyone who's environmentally conscious and needs to commute to the bottom of a hill exactly once and then never again. Now, Milton wound up being convicted of defrauding the company's investors with what prosecutors said were his repeated lies and was facing a 4-year prison term. He was actually appealing that when Trump suddenly stepped in to pardon him. And here is Milton telling the moving story of how Trump broke the news to him over the phone. He says, "Well, um, Trevor, I' I've heard your story. And, um, uh, what they did to you was evil and disgusting. It was wrong on every level. And I'm going to issue you a full and unconditional pardon. The highest pardon a president can give a human is a full and unconditional. and I'm going to give I'm going to issue you a pardon. You don't deserve what you've been through. I'm so sorry. And uh and he says, "You're clean. You're cleaner than a baby's bottom." Trevor, wait. [laughter] Cleaner than a baby's bottom. First, that is not a phrase. But also, if you're trying to talk up someone's honesty and integrity, maybe try and avoid comparing them to something that is famously literally full of And if you're wondering why Trump gave Milton a pardon, here's how he explained it when asked. >> What was your reason for pardoning Trevor Milton? >> Uh, highly recommended by many people that was taken advantage of. They say the the thing that he did wrong was he was one of the first people that supported a gentleman named Donald Trump for president. He supported Trump. He liked Trump. I didn't know him, but he liked him. And they got him. And I said, "That's unfair. There are many people like that. They support Trump and they went after him." Okay. Even by Trump standards, that was a mess. First, he answers the question, "What's your reasoning for pardoning Trevor Milton with, and I quote, "Highly recommended by many people. That was taken advantage of." That is simply not how the English language works. But okay. Then, in the middle of another thought, he switches from speaking in the third person to the first, like a survivor contestant in confessional who's only eaten coconut water for 3 weeks. Rizzo's playing well. Rizzo's dominating. I'm going to faint. Rizzo going down. If you looked at a transcript of what Trump just said on paper, you'd assume it was chat GBT trying to kill itself. But it is notable that Milton wasn't just a supporter of Trump, he was also a heavy donor. In fact, he and his wife made contributions totaling over $1.8 million to a Trump re-election campaign fund just a few months before the pardon. And if that helped swing it, it was frankly money well spent, especially given that in addition to prison, Milton was also facing roughly $676 million in restitution costs. And while historically presidential pardons don't wipe those away, and for very good reason, in Milton's case, it did. So Milton's investors would now get absolutely none of their money back, prompting one reporter to ask him a pretty obvious question. >> If someone came out and said, "I lost my life savings." Would you pay them back? I wouldn't pay him back. I would definitely be open to I've got a few big ventures I'm working on right now. Definitely be open to trying to help those people in the future. Um, so I'm not heartless. As a matter of fact, like I feel for these people probably more than most. >> What an answer. You lost your life savings on my company. May I offer you another amazing investment opportunity? I can't wait to see all the big ventures he's working on. Just think of all the new cutting edge things he's going to roll down a hill. And the thing is, when it comes to getting out of financial restitution to victims, Milton is not a one-off. Trump's second-term pardons alone have taken an estimated $1.3 billion dollars away from victims and survivors of crime. And some are considerably less fun than fake truck shenanigans. Take Joseph Schwarz, the head of a nursing home empire, who was facing three years in prison for, among other things, orchestrating a $39 million payroll tax scheme, to which he had plead guilty. But it wasn't just his employees who suffered from how Schwarz managed his nursing homes. It was the patients in them, too. >> Betty McFaten's son was in a Schwarz run nursing home in Arkansas after a stroke left him unable to move. Sanitary conditions were so poor in 2017 that inspectors documented maggots on her son's catheter. The state later issued fines for neglect. Do you think the people in the nursing home just ignored what was blatantly negligent care? >> Yes, I do. >> Yeah, so do I. And yet, despite all of that, Schwarz received a full pardon from Trump. And while I cannot say for sure why, I'm guessing it didn't hurt that he paid nearly a million dollars to right-wing operatives who claimed to have worked with Laura Luma and another $100,000 or more to a lobbyist who had a different set of connections to Trump. Incredibly, one of the arguments Schwarz's supporters made for his pardon was that he had paid his full $5 million in federal restitution, which makes it pretty frustrating to learn that as part of his pardon, he was actually refunded that $5 million. And the only WAY I'D BE OKAY with that is if the refund had come in the form of $5 million worth of  maggots. Now, obviously that image is an estimate. I don't know what $5 million of maggots looks like. I'm not Joseph Schwarz. The point is, in Trump's second term, it sure feels like, to the extent there is any rhyme or reason in how people get pardons, it has little to do with any of the established criteria. In fact, only 10 of the people granted them since last year had even filed petitions to the office of the pardon attorney, and even within that small group, some did not appear to meet the Justice Department standards and requirements. Instead, we now seem to have a system where things like media coverage, money, and appeals to Trump's vanity are key. In fact, he'll often tie his justification for pardons to what he sees as his own railroading by prosecutors. To the point that, according to administration officials, the magic words to get him to help with a pardon are unjust persecution. Take what happened with the former president of Honduras, Juan Orlando Hernandez, who was pardoned after Roger Stone, famous hat salesman, advocated on his behalf. And after Hernandez's wife appeared on Matt Gates's show to claim that just like Trump, my husband is a victim of the DOJ's Biden lawfare agenda, which is a pretty big stretch given what her husband was convicted of. >> Ernandez was convicted in 2024 [music] of what prosecutors called one of the biggest and most violent narot trafficking conspiracies in the world, protecting drug routes in exchange for millions. In total, prosecutors said he helped flood the US with more than 400 tons of cocaine. He allegedly even boasted they were going to stuff cocaine up the gringo's noses. >> Yeah, pretty bad. I mean, the violent drug conspiracy part that is, not the stuff cocaine up gringo's noses, if anything, that's just helpful customer service. That's at home installation and troubleshooting. It's essentially geek squad but for cocaine. And you think, wait, hold on. Wasn't stopping the flow of drugs across the southern border Trump's whole deal. Isn't that why we recently kidnapped a different country's leader? And why we're blowing up boats off Venezuela on a regular basis? In fact, wasn't they're bringing drugs one of the first things Trump burped into our collective brains a decade ago after descending from hell's mezzanine? Yeah. Yeah, it very much was. And if the world had any justice, his shoelaces were gotten stuck right then and there. And today, instead of intuitively associating Trump with America imploding, we just associated with the need to be really careful at the mall. Look up from your phone there, Alyssa. You don't want to get trumped outside an American Eagle. Learn from history. But maybe the best way to understand just how fully the brakes have come off is to look at what happened with the crypto trading platform Binance. In 2023, the company and its CEO Changpang Xiao, who goes by CZ, plead guilty to violating anti-moneyaundering laws. The DOJ said Jouer would cause significant harm to US national security by allowing sanctioned Iranian crypto exchanges, Russian drug traffickers, Hamas militants, and other criminal groups to move billions of dollars through the exchange. And it was a pretty slam dunk case with, among other things, internal communications from employees, including its chief compliance officer, texting a co-orker like, "Come on, they are here for crime." To which the colleague replied, "We see the bad, but we close two eyes." which is both a flagrant admission of guilt and also a frankly gorgeous way to describe playing peekabboo. Binance's plea agreements constituted the largest settlements in history and the company paid more than $4 billion in fines. And yet, seemingly out of nowhere, Trump gave Xiao a full pardon. And when asked about that just a few days later, his answer wasn't great. >> He plead guilty in 2023 to violating anti-money laundering laws. Right. >> The government at the time said that CZ had caused significant harm to US national security essentially by allowing terrorist groups like Hamas to move millions of dollars around. Why did you pardon him? >> Okay, are you ready? I don't know who he is. I know he got a fourmon sentence or something like that. And I heard it was a Biden witch hunt. >> There it is. There it is right there. Trump's classic move of claiming he doesn't know someone after it turns out his association with them might be a problem. He literally says, "Are you ready there?" as if to prepare everyone for the incoming Okay, buckle the up everyone because even by my standards, this lie is about to be an absolute doozy. But Xiao's pardon may not just have been down to the Biden witch hunt factor because it turns out just months before it came through, Binance had done a crypto deal that benefited the Trump family massively. Very basically, a UAE investment fund bought a stake in Binance. And to do that, they used $2 billion worth of the cryptocoin associated with the Trump family's World Liberty Financial. That meant $2 billion was now parked indefinitely with the company, off of which the Trumps could then earn interest. And while Binance will insist that there was no quid proquo and that it didn't choose the crypto coin in question, what it can still very much do is determine exactly how long World Liberty continues earning interest on that $2 billion, which is pretty meaningful given even a 4% yield would generate $80 million annually, of which the Trump family would be entitled around $30 million a year, which is a lot of money. I mean, $30 million, that's a that's a million signed Italian felony hats. That's Ricesa. [laughter] AND IT'S NOT JUST ME that thinks that Xiao's pardon looks bad. Even Joe Londale, a co-founder of Palanteer and a big Trump supporter, tweeted, "Trump has been terribly advised on this. It makes it look like massive fraud is happening around him in this area." And I do not love being on the same side as that guy. It makes me second guess everything. Now imagine if Tucker Carlson announced that The Comeback is his favorite show of all time. I think I'd kill myself. So what do we do? Well, legally there is not much that we can do, especially given the Supreme Court's found that a president can't be prosecuted for official acts, which giving out pardons unquestionably is. And while some critics have suggested reigning in the president's pardon power, I would want to tread very carefully there because historically the harm of sketchy pardons has generally been offset by clemency coming for many more who actually deserved it. The problem is that right now it feels that that ratio has been reversed and that outside of a few exceptions. It's basically just the scumbags and fraudsters with connections to Trump who get pardons. As one lawyer put it, if you're just an average citizen, you can't even get in the line. I told my guy he'd probably be better off if he broke into the capital or made a major donation to Trump's inauguration, which is pretty bleak, isn't it? especially given just how much Trump loves to rail about how tough he is when it comes to law and order. But that toughness is clearly deeply selective because he'll happily put violent people and fraudsters right back on the streets to victimize people again just because they support him. And that's frankly not likely to stop anytime soon. In fact, he's reportedly promised his top administration officials pardons before he leaves office, effectively meaning that they can get away with any federal crimes that they may commit during his second term, which among other things means RFK Judia is about to enter the illegal wildlife trade in ways that we have never seen before. The hypocrisy here is just so flagrant. Just last week, administration officials triumphantly announced indictments as part of their ongoing crackdown on healthc care fraud. But as reporters quickly pointed out, some of those fraud cases seemed strikingly similar to those for which Trump has granted clemency when people had connections to him. And when one reporter pointed that out during the DOJ's press conference, the answer that he got was pretty revealing. >> President Trump has granted clemency to numerous individuals who have stolen hundreds of millions of dollars in Medicaid funds. Can we expect Amy Bach or any of these folks to be shown the same uh mercy in the future? I'll take a different question as the final question. >> I mean, that is not even an attempt to explain, is it? And if someone is dodging a question that hard, it means the answer is truly bad. If you ask your girlfriend, "Will you marry me?" and she says, "I'll take a DIFFERENT QUESTION. GO AHEAD and download Hinge cuz whatever the real answer is does not bode well for you." And look, while that answer is clearly laughable, the underlying message is pretty dark. Because I know it is not news that America has a two-tiered justice system, but this is taking it to an absurd extreme. The way we're going right now, we may well end up at a point where we don't so much have a system of laws as much as we just have a guy. And if you're on that guy's team, you basically get to commit crimes. But the thing is, that's just not the social contract any of us signed up for. All of this is a very, very slippery slope. And the problem is much like a nickeola truck, once we start going down that slope, it could be very hard to come back.